The Joe Rogan experience.
[unintelligible] Like I listened to your interview with Matt Tybee and,
and you know, the point I was thinking about it,
cause you were talking about it politically,
how we're just living in echo chambers now. So you go on social media,
you're Republican. You're only going to see stuff about that,
that caters to your view.
And the algorithms are even optimized for that because they know that you'll
click on that more and that will lead to more ad dollars. So,
but it's similar with nutrition. So, you know, if you're a vegan,
you go on YouTube,
you're going to see tons of vegan videos and vegan perspective,
same with your Facebook feed, et cetera. And to be fair,
it's the same for people who are into keto or low carb or carnivore or whatever
they're into it's, it's the same thing.
So you're just getting this reinforcing confirmation bias, you know,
supporting, uh, access to information. That.
Is a weird thing about social media algorithms,
whether it's YouTube algorithms or Facebook or any of these things,
is that they're giving you what you want to say, which you would say, oh great.
Well, that's what I want to say. Yeah. But the problem is like,
there's there's so there's so many counter arguments,
like, especially when you're talking about nutrition science,
there's so many discussions on both sides of the fence and it seems like both
sides are preaching to the choir. Yeah. Well.
You know, I mean, we're biased as you said. Uh,
my story is a lot of people know is I was vegan and, and somebody.
Said up, the videos use are the most vegan sounding non.
Yeah. Well, I mean, yeah, I was a vegan. I was vegetarian.
I was a raw food vegan. I was macrobiotic vegan.
I have a lot of friends who are vegan. I have patients that are vegan.
I have nothing against vegans and I totally get the reasons that people become
vegan, but I like many others and my patients and my community,
my health was harmed by that. And, and now, I mean, how was your health harm?
Can you explain it to people? Yeah. I mean, I, I,
I lost weight and as you can see, I don't have a lot to lose to begin with. Um,
I, my digestion got really screwed up. I got depressed.
I'd never been depressed. Like I've never been a person who gets depressed. Um,
I felt anxious. I, uh, you know,
it just was clearly not working for me. And again,
I that's not to say it can't work for some people. Do.
You think the cause of depression had something to do with the diet because of
the lack of cholesterol? It's.
12 Hormones. Iron. Yeah, for sure. Um,
but you know now, like, I mean, it's funny to some, I don't actually,
I make a point of not reading comments usually,
but occasionally I'd come across some on Twitter or something.
The comedian told me, so, so, uh,
you know, people are like, oh, he's such a, you know,
he's going to get on there and just low carb, low carb. That's totally like,
I don't, I'm not a low carb guy and never have been. I, in fact,
I'm in trouble with the low carb community because, you know, I pushed,
I don't think it's right for everybody.
I don't think it's right for performance. Yeah.
I don't see any evidence that for elite athletic performers,
that it's the way to go. And I don't know anyone.
That's an elite athletic performer that follows those diets.
Maybe endurance, endurance runners, Zach bitter.
Zach, and Zach flies in the face of all this stuff. And you know,
if you want to include someone like that guy that ran the Appalachian trail and
48 days or whatever he did, you know what I mean?
Which is no small feat for sure. But I mean,
Zach bitter ran a 20 F he ran a 100
mile race in 11 hours and 40 minutes,
which is 40 something minutes, which is banana.
Running after that. He's a Savage, all he eats rib-eyes.
That's what that guy said. The main,
he talked about the main food in his diet is ribeye steak.
He's mostly Quito. So yeah, I mean, anyways, my point was just like, I'm trying,
I try, I'm not super dogmatic. I'm just like,
I I'm interested in what works for the most people essentially.
And you know, uh, you mentioned Scott,
Jurek a Belgian, Dennis shattered his record by five days,
a couple of years ago.
And that guy was eating like Snickers and tons of crap. So I'm,
I'm not saying that that shattered his record by five days. Yeah. Oh Jesus.
I'm not saying that that's what I'm shooting.
I'm not saying that's what you should do,
but I'm saying there's more to athletic performance than food.
I guess.
That's not really deceptive because he did break the record when he broke it,
he did break it. He broke.
It. He's a phenomenal athlete. We don't want to take that away from him.
And then like Michael Phelps, you know,
guy who's pizza guy eats 12,000 calories of like sugar sweets,
French toast pizza. Um,
same bolt in the Beijing link. The Olympics. When he shattered those records,
he Fe he ate a thousand over a thousand chicken nuggets.
I think somebody calculated. So I know there's more,
there's more to it than that. When you're at that.
Level of performance, you are burning off such an insane amount of calories.
It doesn't matter so hard. You can kind of almost eat anything when you're,
when you're in that mode. Yeah. Yeah. When we,
and this is obviously not comparable, but when we did sober October last year,
we had this fitness challenge. I was doing cardio. No, no joke.
It minimum five hours a day, sometimes six and seven. It was insane.
And I was eating everything. Boxes of cookies got bought bottles of soda,
probably lost weight too. I did well. Not really.
Cause I lifted a lot of weights too. Yeah. I kind of maintained.
Maybe I lost a couple of bounds, but I was drinking like giant, like coax,
like a, like a, I was drinking like a cream soda. I never drank that,
but it's like, my body wanted sugar. It's like, give me some sugar.
You just did seven hours on a elliptical machine. Right. And it was,
it was so ridiculous, but those guys are working out even harder than that.
So imagine like, what.
Do you need? 12,000 calories.
You're not getting it with paleo and you're not getting it with vegan diet.
That's important. No, that's important. So let's go,
let's rewind a little bit to the protein,
the RDA protein that's super important.
So 0.8 kilograms per grams per kilogram of protein
per day is the RGA. And again, that's just the basic minimum.
That's not the amount that's needed for optimal health and performance.
That's just the absolute basics for not for avoiding malnutrition. However,
even that number now, uh,
that's based on outdated nitrogen balance studies for determining the RDA.
And there's a newer method called the indicator amino acid oxidation technique,
or I a O um,
and this suggests that the RDA should be 1.2 grams per kilogram. And again,
just the basic minimum bare minimum, not optimal.
So it's now gone up from 0.8 to 1.2.
And if you use that number, if you pull up slide eight, Jamie,
um, that's only enough for an adult that weighs less than 130 pounds.
Really?
So the sorry, the, you know how he said,
and James said in the study, the average vegetarian gets 71 grams a day,
which is not only, you know, the RDA, but 70% more, that's using the 0.8 number.
But if you use 1.2 grams per kilogram per day,
then a lot of people are going to be protein deficient on a vegetarian diet.
And we're not again, not talking about optimal amount for athletes.
We're just talking about the RDA basic bare minimum.
Vegetarian,
you should say vegan crap because you're not talking about egg protein.
No, this study was vegetarian. They weren't referring to vegan. So you.
Actually could get egg, protein.
Dairy and dairy protein eggs.
Are a far superior in terms of their Mino assets, then vegetables. Yeah.
So for vegans, it would be different. Yeah.
I taught, I brought up eggs to a friend of mine. I was uh,
saying this really recently, why don't you try eggs? And, uh, they,
they looked to me like I was talking to them about poison. Yeah. Like people,
there's plenty of people that are vegan or vegetarian and you bring up eggs to
them and they look you like, why would I eat.
An egg? Yeah. So, so that's, you know,
1.2 is the RDA with, if you use this newer method. Um,
but for athletes, uh,
James to his credit does acknowledge in the film that athletes need more protein
than, than regular non-athlete people. But he doesn't say how much more. So,
uh, again, if you use these IAO method, they've done,
they use this newer technique to look at athletes.
And they've found that the range is somewhere between 1.4 to 2.7 grams
per kilogram. So we're now way higher than that 0.8 number.
And just for people who aren't familiar with kilograms,
let's say we take the median number there 2.1 grams per kilogram per day. Well,
anyone who's ever been in the bodybuilding weightlifting community will
recognize this that's one pound of protein per pound of body weight a day,
which has been the common recommendation in that community for one.
Gram of protein, sorry, one gram of protein powder.
One gram. And in fact, even Arnold in the movie says, I weighed 250 pounds.
I used to eat 250 grams of protein. You know, like that's,
that's the recommendation, but it turns out that's actually based on science,
you know? Um,
so a 200 pound athlete would need 200 grams of protein a day.
And Jamie, if you pull up slide 10,
this is what you'd have to eat on a vegan diet to get that amount of protein.
And again, we're just talking about quantity.
We're not talking about being an athlete. That's me. I went to an athlete.
So you have to eat three, three cups of cooked lentils,
three cups of chickpeas, two cups of keenwah,
three ounces of almonds, three slices of silken tofu,
and 10 tablespoons of peanut butter.
That's the whole day. That's the day I could that up in a day. Yeah.
You could. But the problem is the BA the D the DIA score for all of those,
like the bioavailability in the amino acid profile would be horrible compared
to meat, eggs, dairy. So.
I have to do, because I know they've done this study.
There was a study that I had read or had heard about, I should say, um,
where they compared a rice protein to whey protein.
And they found that at a certain level of grams,
like whatever it was, they had an equal effect. Is it lutein,
leucine, leucine, the muscle protein synthesis? Yeah.
An equal effect should give credit to the video that I was watching this, um,
gentlemen, I was watching this video today, um,
Dr. Ryan Lowery,
and that they were saying that what that means is that correct me if I'm wrong,
what it is is when you get it, once you hit a certain level of leucine,
it's a point of diminishing returns and there's no,
there's no added benefit to having more leucine in your diet.
So if you hit whatever it is, I think it was 48 grams or something like that.
When you have 48 grams of this and 40 grams of that,
you put the two of them together. It's essentially the same,
this the same effect. Well.
I'm not sure about that, but I mean,
leucine is very important for anabolic signaling and muscle protein synthesis.
It's, it's one of the essential,
it's the essential amino acid that's thought to be the most important for that.
And it's, it's low in plant proteins. And, uh,
the other issue with plant proteins that you have is that they have limiting
amino acids.
So these are amino acids that actually interfere with muscle protein synthesis.
So, uh, because the levels are so low in that food. So lysine,
isn't a limiting amino acid in grains like wheat and rice,
maybe that's there was leucine and lysine discussion maybe there,
and then methianine insisting are limiting and legumes like soy.
So Jamie on slide six,
I made a chart comparing the amino acid profile and beef,
several different plant proteins, like white beans, soybeans, peas, and rice.
What you can see there is beef is higher in
every single amino acid. Um,
other than every plant protein that's compared there with the exception
of, uh,
soybeans are slightly higher in tryptofan than beef look at leucine.
So beef it's 2.23 versus
0.58 for white beans.
1.3 for soy soy is higher and leucine than any other plant
protein, which is why it's often used.
And then like 0.3 for peas and 0.01 for right. Yes.
If you get to a certain number or a certain level of all these.
So if you ate enough food that you would pass a certain marker, would,
would it be possible to have the same effect by eating cooked peas or
soybeans?
For sure. So I agree with that enormous amount of that, as you can see,
because of the levels,
and this is why a lot of vegan bodybuilders and athletes end up using protein
powders,
because you can get to those amounts easier by using the powders.
And you can also blend like a P you know,
70% P with 30% rice to get the right amino acid
ratio easier with powders.
So like Patrick [inaudible] is a good example of that, you know? Uh,
did you see the video that Bobby Geist made of his, uh, oh,
so there's actually a video. Is that the one that you sent me? Yes,
I did see that there's video that Patrick made himself of his own diet, um,
on, you know, what he eats on a daily basis.
And it turns out to be a boatload of protein powder and just shakes with all
kinds of powders and supplements and things like that. So, yeah,
we can go through it.
So he starts with a bunch of different supplements in the morning, multivitamin,
nutritional yeast, glucosamine, magnesium, calcium, B12, and iron.
Then he has a protein shake with soy protein powder, creatine, and beta alanine,
which probably is because he's aware of the research showing lower levels of
muscle creatine and carnosine and vegans, um,
beta alanine, and creatine would address that.
Then he has a post-workout smoothie with Sawyer, pea protein powder, glutamine,
beta alanine, creatine, and drag greens.
And then his first solid meal of the day is fried falafel, French fries,
soy sausage, fried peppers, and tomatoes.
And then he has some more protein shakes and smoothies throughout the day.
So I don't know that doesn't strike me as a super healthy way to eat.
What, what do you, what problem do you have with that?
Well, first of all,
I think we should primarily get nutrients from food whenever we can.
I'm not against supplementation. I think there's a role for it. Of course. Like,
you know,
especially with things like vitamin D that you might not be able to get enough
of from food or a therapeutic supplementation,
if you're dealing with a health problem, but like getting them,
like eating a diet that is not sufficient in the amount of nutrients that you
need, and then using supplements to make up, you know, to,
to address that doesn't make a lot of sense to me.
Well, in his situation, he's got a very unique situation that he's a,
he's a strength athlete. That's all he's doing is trying to lift really,
really heavy things. So he needs to maintain a certain amount of ball. Yes.
Seven normous amount of protein. Yeah. And normally smell.
Protein has to be, and he's very heavy, you know, and that,
that sport is also, that's a steroid sport. I mean,
it's just one of those sports where it's like bodybuilding much everybody's
steroid sport. Um, so you're eating massive amounts of quantities.
You taking chemicals. Yeah. It might not be the healthiest thing,
but it's also like just the sport itself might not be the healthiest thing.
I mean, you've seen them carry people on the, he was doing that in the film.
That's not good for your.
Back. That's crazy. But it works.
For what he's trying to do. Obviously it's working for what he's trying to do.
There's no dispute in that.
See what he's doing as almost like the intelligent way,
if you want to be vegan and do what he's trying to do. Right.
I don't know if he could eat just vegetables and pull that off.
But that's kind of the point.
There are a lot of other strong men that do just Robert Oberst you get.
On the show? Yeah. He just eats meat and rice, right.
That guy it's pounds and pounds of beef and rice simple, you.
Know, accessible form of carbohydrate and a lot of protein.
An unfair comparison in Obers talked about him on the podcast before they're
much lower. He's much larger.
The strong man, huge like the guy who played Gregor, uh, in game of Thrones,
right? Yes. He's was like six, eight or nine. Yeah. He's a normal house.
And Patrick.
Is not, he's not nearly that size five, six or five seven or something.
So the comparison between him and a guy like Oberst in those legit,
top of the food chain, strongest man in the world competitions, it's not,
it's not comp.
Totally different way class he's well.
Robert is enormous. He's so much bigger,
but the problem is in the film, they don't make that distinction.
And they try to pretend that this guy is one of the strongest men in the world.
He's not, he's very strong, no doubt.
And he definitely has broken some records in some competitions and, you know,
and, you know, have different weight classes and different,
but you're not talking about a guy who wins those, you know, Magnus,
Von Magnuson competitions, where they're carrying trucks and.
Well, I mean, I guess my point too was like,
is it the best example of how an athlete can thrive on a plant-based whole foods.
Diet? It is though, because for him, for his size, you know,
for it to be a guy who's five foot seven and is carrying that enormous amount of
weight,
he's obviously doing something that's very impressive and he's doing it while
he's on this vegan diet. And again, I mean,
just the discounting, all the illegal supplementation,
because I don't think it is illegal in that sport. It's kind of,
you kind of have to do it because you want to get that big there.
But if you want to do it and do it as a vegan,
he is showing you that it's possible. So in that sense,
I defend what he's doing, because I think that he, like,
that's the only way in that,
but this is a very sport-specific area of performance.
He's just talking about lifting insanely heavy.
And he's doing that and thriving on a vegan diet. Yeah.
No doubt, you know, enormously strong and he's succeeding. Um,
I would argue that he might do even better if he was eating meat, you know,
nutrient dense, more nutrient dense food,
and he might need to take fewer supplements and drink less powder. Um,
but I think from his outfits, I'm more like a whole foods person.
And, you know, that's where I'm coming from.